---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: The code I’m still ashamed of
date: 2017-11-30
labels:
 - Essay
---

Being ethical is basically doing the right thing. Not justice or being right but doing what is the right thing that should be done for the people around you, your community. Having a good ethic could mean being responsibly for the responsibilities that one may have taken on as a task, being known to be a trustworthy person who others can vouch for, knowing that creating and circulating the next advanced new ransomware is something that one should not do, and knowing that your actions will have some kind of effect on society in one way or another.

So Bill created this questionaire when he was working in a marketing firm, though this questionaire which was directed at teenage girls all advised them to take a particular drug as long as they were not allergic or already taking the drug. He completes the task and does it well, though it has certain extraneous information that wasnt relevant to Bill’s task that was contracted to the marketing firm. This was that the drug that the questionaire was for has killed a teenage girl because a side effect was that it caused suicidal thoughts and also depression. 

In the end Bill finds himself to be ashamed because he has contributed to the drug’s marketing. Though he did not do anything explicitly to try to convince people to take the drug, he has made a survey which the contracter gave the specifications for. This in a way may be called unethical because he was in a way contributing to something which caused harm to the public. He had chances to try and see red flags to what was happening with the drug in the world but he had a responsibility to his boss and company to do what was asked. It is a very complex situation to think about and one I hope not to find myself in. 