---
layout: essay
type: essay
published: true
title: Connecting the Dots via Patterns
date: 2017-12-06
labels:
 - Essay
---

Patters are essentially part of what makes a human being. When the brain encounters information delivered from our sensory organs neurons fire when you consistantly encounter the same information the same neurons fire and eventually form a neural connection, these connections are like patterns, they follow a similar path when firing and encountering information. So it seems like a no brainer that code has design patterns that are followed. Though in the design patterns most of these "connections" have been made already and form a sort of template that can be followed. Though all you have to do is fill in the rest of the template like getting a partially completed connecting the dots puzzle. You have most of it firing all you have to do is bridge the gaps and all the dots/neurons/patterns will be complete and firing. Though you have to choose the correct design pattern or else the pattern will not fit the right outcome that you want and you may have to work harder to accomplish your goal or arrive at a different result that does not fulfill your goal.

Design patterns have been shown to me since the first year I started to learn computer science and the professors and the TAs were trying to model how a class is made of and gave an example of a car and how a car has different parts and how the different parts have different uses/functions. It is basically a hierarchy of what things were connected to others. This is a basic use of how a factory method works. In my personal use I remember using the factory method to create different animals and they just get spit out of the constructor like a factory spits out cars or toys or processed foods. Each animal may have different aspects but they all generally had the same general parts. An example may be a car because almost every car has the same parts but differnt make and models, the same basic car but with what people sell as premium parts can be sold for more that twice as much, even though they have a similar design and they both do the same thing. 

